Add `lesion-analysis` tutorial (#4586)
spinalcordtoolbox/spinalcordtoolbox: documentation/source/user_section/tutorials/lesion-analysis/lesion-statistics/lesion-metrics.rst

  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/axial-damage-ratio.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

TODO: Ask Andrew Smith for permission to use the figure

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/tissue-bridges.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

``sct_analyze_lesion`` can be applied to lesion and spinal cord segmentation masks using the following command

.. code:: sh

   sct_analyze_lesion -m t2_lesion_seg.nii.gz -s t2_sc_seg.nii.gz

:Input arguments:
   - ``-m`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented lesion
   - ``-s`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented spinal cord

:Output files/folders:
   - TODO

.. note::

   You can use ``sct_analyze_lesion`` on lesion and spinal cord segmentation masks produced automatically (for example by SCT's deep learning models; see :ref:`lesion-segmentation <lesion-segmentation>` for more information. ) or manually.

Details:
* **maximum axial damage ratio:** `Smith, A.C., et al. Spinal Cord (2021) <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41393-020-00561-w>`_

> * **tissue bridges:** `Enamundram, N.K.*, Valošek, J.*, et al. arXiv (2024) <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.17265>`_, `Huber, E., et al. Ann Neurol. (2017) <https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24932>`_, `Pfyffer, D., et al. Lancet Neurol. (2024) <https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00173-X>`_

Author: CI seems to be crashing on the last ref:

<img width="719" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/44b42b55-2cb2-45e7-b84d-4f45ce11baee">

Interestingly, CI does not take the full DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00173-X

Reviewer: Oh there's a parenthesis in the url! I'll look at the checker script for why this is a problem.

Reviewer: But it looks like the figures (the other urls ending in `.png`) seem to be really missing.

Author: > But it looks like the figures (the other urls ending in .png) seem to be really missing.

Yes, good point! Because figures are not merged to master yet: https://github.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/pull/6

Reviewer: I see! The opening parenthesis isn't recognized as a valid URL character in this regex, so the url gets cut short:
https://github.com/spinalcordtoolbox/spinalcordtoolbox/blob/7b863f3eb3600d98a0f6525fc6dea56f5f5ede23/.github/workflows/check-code-quality.yml#L43

Honestly, parentheses are used so often around URLs (for example, in markdown links) that this is a reasonable restriction. I would suggest percent-encoding the parentheses in your link like this:
```suggestion
* **tissue bridges:** `Enamundram, N.K.*, Valošek, J.*, et al. arXiv (2024) <https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2407.17265>`_, `Huber, E., et al. Ann Neurol. (2017) <https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24932>`_, `Pfyffer, D., et al. Lancet Neurol. (2024) <https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422%2824%2900173-X>`_
```

Author: > I would suggest percent-encoding the parentheses in your link like this:

 Good idea! Committing the suggestion

> Compute lesion metrics using ``sct_analyze_lesion``

Author: I think it would be better to be consistent. 

```suggestion
Compute lesion morphometric measures using ``sct_analyze_lesion``
```

#################################################################

> The ``sct_analyze_lesion`` function computes various morphometric measures on segmented lesions and spinal cord. The function assigns an ID value to each lesion (1, 2, 3, etc.) and then outputs morphometric measures for each lesion to a XLS file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``sct_analyze_lesion`` function computes various morphometric measures on segmented lesions and the spinal cord. The function assigns an ID value to each lesion (1, 2, 3, etc.) and then outputs morphometric measures for each lesion to an XLS file.
```

  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

TODO: Ask Andrew Smith for permission to use the figure

* ``dorsal_bridge_width [mm]`` : dorsal tissue bridges defined as the width of dorsal spared tissue (i.e. towards the posterior direction of the AP axis) at the minimum distance from the intramedullary lesion edge to the boundary between the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid
* ``ventral_bridge_width [mm]`` : ventral tissue bridges defined as the width of ventral spared tissue (i.e. towards the anterior direction of the AP axis) at the minimum distance from the intramedullary lesion edge to the boundary between the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/tissue-bridges.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 80%

Running ``sct_analyze_lesion``
------------------------------

``sct_analyze_lesion`` can be applied to lesion and spinal cord segmentation masks using the following command

.. code:: sh

   sct_analyze_lesion -m t2_lesion_seg.nii.gz -s t2_sc_seg.nii.gz

:Input arguments:
   - ``-m`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented lesion

>    - ``-s`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented spinal cord

Author: The tutorial currently does not cover the `-f` input arg (atlas/template) ([L74-L76](https://github.com/spinalcordtoolbox/spinalcordtoolbox/blob/master/spinalcordtoolbox/scripts/sct_analyze_lesion.py#L74-L76)). Maybe we could also add a section about this arg. Possibly as a new page so that the current page is not too heavy?

Author: We agreed during the 2024-08-08 SCT dev meeting that adding a tutorial for the `-f` arg is a good idea!

Author: Done in https://github.com/spinalcordtoolbox/spinalcordtoolbox/pull/4586/commits/79e9f0b9881daa66331486010d2756a116ea0ed8

> Compute lesion morphometric measures using ``sct_analyze_lesion``
> #################################################################

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compute lesion morphometric measures
##############################
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Various morphometrics
-----------------------
```

> The ``sct_analyze_lesion`` function computes various morphometric measures on segmented lesions and spinal cord.
> In case of multiple lesions, the function assigns an ID value to each lesion (1, 2, 3, etc.) and then outputs morphometric measures for each lesion to an XLS file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here, we will see how to compute various morphometric measures on segmented lesions. For example, the number of lesions, their size, etc. The statistics will be output in an Excel (XLS) file.

In case of multiple lesions, the function assigns an ID value to each lesion (1, 2, 3, etc.) and then outputs morphometric measures for each lesion to an XLS file.
```

The following morphometric measures are computed:

* ``volume [mm^3]`` : volume of the lesion
* ``length [mm]`` : length of the lesion along the superior-inferior (SI) axis

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/intramedullary-lesion-length.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

* ``max_equivalent_diameter [mm]`` : maximum diameter of the lesion, when approximating the lesion as a circle in the axial plane
* ``max_axial_damage_ratio []`` : maximum axial damage ratio defined as the ratio of the lesion area divided by the spinal cord area. The ratio is computed in the axial plane for each slice and and the maximum ratio is reported.

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/axial-damage-ratio.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

> TODO: Ask Andrew Smith for permission to use the figure

Reviewer 3: to address

Author: confirmed by email -- we have the permission from Andrew Smith to use the figure
TODO removed in https://github.com/spinalcordtoolbox/spinalcordtoolbox/pull/4586/commits/86285acaea993f9798c0861b1c591553b89f8f9f

* ``dorsal_bridge_width [mm]`` : dorsal tissue bridges defined as the width of dorsal spared tissue (i.e. towards the posterior direction of the AP axis) at the minimum distance from the intramedullary lesion edge to the boundary between the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid
* ``ventral_bridge_width [mm]`` : ventral tissue bridges defined as the width of ventral spared tissue (i.e. towards the anterior direction of the AP axis) at the minimum distance from the intramedullary lesion edge to the boundary between the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/spinalcordtoolbox/doc-figures/master/lesion-analysis/tissue-bridges.png
  :align: center
  :figwidth: 60%

> Running ``sct_analyze_lesion``
> ------------------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Compute statistics
--------------------
```

> ``sct_analyze_lesion`` can be applied to lesion and spinal cord segmentation masks using the following command

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To compute the statistics, run the following command
```

.. code:: sh

   sct_analyze_lesion -m t2_lesion_seg.nii.gz -s t2_sc_seg.nii.gz -qc ./qc

:Input arguments:
   - ``-m`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented lesion
   - ``-s`` : 3D binary mask of the segmented spinal cord
   - ``-qc`` : Directory for Quality Control reporting. QC report contains a figure for the tissue bridges

:Output files:
   - ``t2_lesion_analysis.xls`` : XLS file containing the morphometric measures
   - ``t2_lesion_analysis.pkl`` : Python Pickle file containing the morphometric measures
   - ``t2_lesion_label.nii.gz`` : 3D mask of the segmented lesion with lesion IDs (1, 2, 3, etc.)

> 
> .. note::
> 
>    You can use ``sct_analyze_lesion`` on lesion and spinal cord segmentation masks produced automatically (for example by SCT's deep learning models; see :ref:`lesion-segmentation <lesion-segmentation>` for more information) or manually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
